Hey everybody, Casey Muratori here. We are at the end of our Kickstarter promotional videos — this is the last one. It's a two-parter. If you haven't checked out the Kickstarter already, please do — it's for a graphic novel, *Meow the Infinite*. It's awesome. We'd love to send you a book or two. Please check it out when you get a chance.

This video is an invited lecture that I gave to a company called infura.io. I submitted a request saying "please give me topics that you'd like me to cover," and one of the things I saw in a lot of the topics that came back was this underlying concept of code getting out of control — huge code bases, slow and underperforming, and so on. So this was my attempt to give a general-audience answer to the question: where does bad code come from? Where do these problems come from? This is a two-parter. The first part is the lecture; the second part will be the Q&A. I hope you enjoy it, and I'll be back afterwards to talk about part two.

---

Where does bad code come from? We know that it's everywhere right now. If you have experienced programming for a long time, or if you in general look at the way things are going from a more objective observer standpoint, you can see that there seems to be a lot wrong with software today.

First of all, there's way too much code. Even fairly simple pieces of software now are hundreds of thousands of lines of code, millions of lines of code, and so on. They're typically built in these very fragile build systems — oftentimes so complicated that they end up having to be wrapped inside things like Docker containers, even to just try and get them to keep running into the future, because they have so many crazy dependencies and there's really no way to guarantee that all the things will remain working or in lockstep as they move forward.

When you actually do have everything installed properly on your machine, and when you've finished having a package manager install the language — which installs some package manager, which then goes and gets the packages, which unpack, which install their own packages — after you manage to get all of that going and you actually can run a build, the builds take forever. Sometimes things like TensorFlow — that a lot of people use, that are very popular projects — seem to take hours to build, which is absolutely incredible if you think about how much power computers have today.

When the actual software comes out the other end, the quality is not very high. There's a lot of sitting around waiting for it to do things like load or communicate with a network, and it really just stalls while that's happening and doesn't let you do very much. It's slow when it actually does things — things that should be much faster on today's hardware are not; they're still quite slow. It takes a ton of space as well. These programs now take up huge amounts of space — you have 100, 200-megabyte executables, which is insane — and their working footprints are many gigabytes of memory, even for doing things that seem very simple, like just scrolling some 2D images. Things that are very basic nonetheless are taking tremendous amounts of storage, tremendous amounts of memory. It's very odd that that would be going on.

And finally, it's not like software got tremendously more reliable or something else happened. It's still totally buggy, and it has all the same problems, if not more, than it has always had before. It jumped this level of complexity — and in general, this overall overriding sense of decay that seems to be seeping into whatever we call the software industry currently.

---

If we want to actually try and talk about where bad code comes from, we have to start making some judgment calls about what we mean when we say "bad code" anyway. I can talk about all those things and complain about stuff, but if I don't have some more specific understanding of what it really is that I'm talking about, it's not going to be possible for us to get anywhere. We can't really get anywhere fixing the problem; we're just saying that the problem exists, which is great, but we do have to then figure out: how are we going to move forward?

So I'm going to make a little bit of a judgment call here and say: when I'm talking about bad code, or what we should be concerned about with bad code, it doesn't really have much to do with money. If you're talking about wanting to make money, I don't think the current environment — at least for the time being — really cares that much about the quality of your code. There's so little competition in the software space right now, because there's so much software to write — we're still relatively early in the evolution of software, there's still so many places you can take software to — that there isn't a lot of market pressure to ship high-quality stuff. A lot of times consumers, or whoever your customers are, are choosing between a very small field of options. So being someone who ships a quality product, while it may be a tremendous competitive advantage if you do, will not exactly be a requirement competitively, because other people are not shipping quality software. So you really don't need this to make money yet. You might in the future, but I'm not going to try and make an argument that you need to do this for the financial well-being of your company or your career, or anything like that.

And I'm also not claiming that people aren't having fun. They might not be — it may be that current software practices are really not fun for them — but it could be that you just drop on your VR goggles and you download a bunch of frameworks and you get them all called together eventually, and you just play around with it, and you had fun and it was okay. Who knows?

So I'm not going to claim either of those two things, because I don't think there's really any need to go down that route. All I'm trying to talk about when we talk about bad code is: what's our potential? What could we be doing engineering-wise versus where we currently are? Are we performing up to that potential at all, or are we actually falling pretty far behind where we could be if we looked at what we could be delivering to our customers and to society, if we took things more seriously? So I don't think we have to do this; it's just, if you care about quality, what are we talking about here? That's what I mean when I say bad code. We're looking at something that seems like, "boy, we should be able to do a lot better than this. Why aren't we right now?"

---

It's important to distinguish between two things. I actually think, as an industry, we haven't done that poorly on algorithms. Algorithms are actually understood in some pretty profound ways. The people who have done all the work figuring out order notation, and what the complexity classes of things are — they haven't proved whether P equals NP yet or whatever — but at the end of the day, there's a lot of stuff we know. We know how to analyze hash tables and how to think about them. We know what the properties are of a heap, or what different sorting algorithms will do. We have a lot of ways of thinking about algorithms. And furthermore, a lot of the advice you see about algorithms may not be awful. It's possible that in general you can experience algorithms in a pretty sane way. You can be taught algorithms in the same way, you can think about them the same way. That's actually, I don't think, all that unusual.

So if I was trying to point a finger and say "this is the place that I think we're going wrong" — algorithms, and the actual specific idea of how some piece of a program is going to work algorithmically, just doesn't seem like what we're really talking about when we're talking about the bulk of bad code as we perceive it, or bad software as we perceive it. It's usually not what sorting algorithm did you choose. Usually what we're talking about is the mess of the rest of the code. We are having a problem writing all the code that glues these algorithms together. When we're talking about what we're actually going to do here, the problem we actually have is not so much that we couldn't sit down and figure out what the proper algorithm is for this. The problem seems to be more that we can't figure out how to connect these things, or how to manage the infrastructure into which these algorithms are placed. That is what's going off the rails.

And so the question is: how did we get there? In the old days, that really couldn't be the case, because there were hard constraints on what you could ship. When a computer only has 64K of RAM in it, there's no way for that glue code to spiral out of control. There's no way for the infrastructure to be all that big to begin with. So there is a natural limit on what could actually happen there, and it seemed to be working to that effect. Nowadays we don't have that, and it seems like we have never developed any replacement for it. So the question is: why?

---

In order to understand why we haven't developed a replacement for it, I'm going to have to talk a little bit about how you actually learn to make stuff on a computer. I realize it's going to sound very trite — maybe to people who aren't programmers it won't, but to people who are programmers, this is going to sound a little bit silly. But please think about it. Actually think about this for a second, because if you actually think about it for a second, you'll realize that we all take it for granted. We all take for granted that this is going on, and nobody talks about it, but we kind of need to.

Nobody's born knowing how to program a computer. And I know this better than anybody, because I learned to program at a very early age. But before I could learn to program, I literally sat — I was a little tiny child, I sat at a keyboard that my parents had, that my dad had — I would just type. I would type gibberish into the computer. If you think about it, you first learn to just input characters or something into a computer, and if you're young enough, they're literally just garbage. But soon, what you're doing is your brain is training itself up to learn that only certain combinations of letters — only certain syntax — will produce a result. If you're using a programming language, this is why we call them languages: they have grammar, they have syntax, all this sort of stuff. So something in your brain — and we're not advanced enough technologically to know what's actually going on exactly — but something in your brain is creating a filter and a generator: something that's able to produce valid syntax for a particular language, and also able to throw out ones that it wouldn't want or wouldn't need, or that don't get closer to something. It's got a metric.

If you think about this in terms of AI research or something like that, there's a training process. You have to train up some generator to generate things that are valid in the output domain, and then you need some kind of filtering process that's going to get you closer to whatever it is that you're trying to achieve with that generative process. And so this builds and builds over time when you're a programmer. In your head you start to learn that you can make new parts of this — functions and things like that, or get new ones from libraries — and you're starting to think at a higher level. So that generator is now generating things higher up, and again filtering things higher up. And then finally you look at experienced programmers — people in it for a long time, not necessarily good or bad, just experienced — their code just becomes very regularized. That filter has dialed in quite a bit. They're throwing out a lot of possible options that would be legal in the language they're programming in, and only selecting from a very narrow set. So that generator/filter process is producing highly regularized, very predictable things at that point — which, we don't know what that means, we can't understand it at a deep physiological level, but what we do know is, it means a huge possibility space has been carved off of that system.

We all know that when we first learned to type in babble — just the literal syntax of the language — anything was possible. You just type anything in that was legal in the language, and you could type it in. And over time you lose the ability to type certain things in. And it's not like you couldn't force yourself to; it's just you don't. So you've tuned the generator and the filter in your brain to just do a certain narrow subset of things. And what we think when we think of "experienced programmer" is that that was good — that was a good process, now they're producing good code or something.

I know it sounded silly; hopefully though, when we get to the end there, you're not too disagreeing with me about the fact that something like this must be going on in our brains. So, our brains have learned this filter process, this thing that's going on, and we all have a slightly different one. But anyone who's been programming for any appreciable time has formed this somehow.

---

I like to think of this as a metaphor in my brain. I always think of it this way, because I don't really know how to think about it, and the way I think about it is exploration. I started out in my code bases in some sense, and I think of that generator process as being almost like a navigator. At any point in time when I'm going to figure out what I'm going to do in the code, I'm thinking — it's like dead reckoning a little bit. It's like, well, I think the answer is probably this way. I'm going to try some things, sometimes I backtrack. I'm trying to navigate, and over time I'm trying to get to a destination that I believe is somewhere, but I don't know exactly where it is. Maybe you've had this feeling as well — this feeling that it's a journey. The metaphors people normally use don't actually apply that well. It's not like architecture. It's not like other things where we do a lot of solving first and then just put it in there. UML diagram — people have tried — but it doesn't seem to really go that way. It feels more like a journey where we're not really sure about the end result and we're trying to get there. And maybe the better programmers are better at making that journey, and the newer programmers who have a lot to learn — it's worse. But it feels that way to me.

And we don't have maps. We're navigators that don't know the lay of the land, so we're constantly trying to figure out as we go. That's how I normally think about it. When we're setting off on these things and looking for things, they could be very uncharted — we could be trying to go somewhere that no one's ever gone before — or we might be just trying to do something we do know pretty well, and we understand the route, but we might do it a little differently this time because we know how the route went last time and we think we could improve it, things like that.

Sometimes this works great. We end up in a place that's fantastic, it's everything we dreamed of when we thought we were going to go there. Other times we just say, "forget it, this thing ain't shipping, ditch the boat, take as much food as you can, walk across the iceberg, and let's hope that we encounter another human being before we all die." So it has the same analogies in a way. The way it ends is similar to the way journeys end in the real world too sometimes.

The path we took to get there — I alluded to this — has implications. We can think of that as how the development process went. If this went really straight and clean — we were just like, okay, that was great, that was easy. If it was really messy and all the way around — really circuitous, or we had to backtrack a ton of times — maybe that was a rougher development process.

The place we end up is how I think of what we've achieved. It's like the quality. I did this journey, I ended up somewhere, and when I get there I know — this is why it's a navigational process with software. I don't necessarily know exactly what the thing will be at the end. Sometimes I don't even really know at all what the thing will be at the end, but I will know when I get there, or when I get close enough to it. And that's why it's a very navigational process, because much like a function where you can only evaluate it at points and you can't predict really what it's going to be very well, we just kind of only know — if we're trying to go from South America to Africa, we will probably know when we hit land, but before then we may not really know how it's going. But we will know when we get there. And when we talk to the people there we'll be like, "is this Africa?" and they'll be like, "yes," or something. So we'll know when we get there, but we won't necessarily know — and even when we actually get there, we might not know where we are exactly in that area either. Maybe we were aiming for South Africa, and we end up up in Egypt somehow or something like this. So I think of it as this: where we end up is the quality of the result.

---

So what we're seeing when we talk about the bad code situation is: in these processes I feel like we're just getting horribly lost. Not only are we aimlessly creating these huge routes through things that are very wasteful and take way too much time and all these other sorts of things, but also when we end up somewhere, it doesn't really seem to be very good. It seems like we're nowhere near where we wanted to be. And it feels this way sometimes too — this is another reason I like this analogy. Someone's in the middle of a development process, or even at the end, you're just like, "oh man, we totally lost our way. We can't even really see how we would get there."

Another reason that I like this analogy is because it feels this way in the moment too sometimes. Sometimes you're like, "I just don't know what we would do to get past this." It's very intangible in that way. You can't quite put your finger on why the code isn't coming out, or what you should do. You're doing things that you thought should get you further, and they're not, or they're just knocking you back, or it just doesn't seem to be getting better. It feels like being lost in a lot of ways.

---

Okay, so in order to understand why that process might be going wrong, I want to put the blame — because I have an opinion about what is to blame for this process going wrong. I want to put the blame on how we construct that navigational process, that filter process, in the brain — of navigating what we're going to do as we code — both institutionally and individually. How we do that, building up that part of brains, I think we're now doing a horrible job.

In the old days, the lack of resources — the 64K of the machine, the fact that it was a 6802 processor[^1] which could barely do anything, the fact that loads from disc took eons — meant that the development of that process in anyone's brain who could ever get a program to work at all, they had already gone through the process of being very aware of what they were doing. Everything they did would either succeed or fail based on whether the software was any good. Because even a slight bit of being bad meant you couldn't get the thing to work at all in such harsh environments. It's like, if the explorers were trained in the Arctic, then all of them died who weren't really good or didn't learn really fast.

So how are we doing this process now? To a certain extent some people are still doing it individually, and that tends to also be highly coincident with people who maybe aren't causing quite so much of the bad code explosion. But probably everyone, to a certain extent, does work individually, and that's just you naturally experiencing things. There isn't an external force pushing at you there — you're just playing around and learning on your own.

But the vast majority of the tuning that happens in those processes now doesn't come from that, because again, the resources are almost limitless there, and there isn't much of a weeding-out process that can really happen. It's not like on an old home computer that was really difficult to use, where you would have to get good automatically because otherwise you'd never be able to do it, or you just quit and go do something else.

So a lot of times where things come from is classes, universities, things like that. It might come from code reviews, or mentors — there's a programmer who ostensibly knows something and they're going to tell you that thing or tell you what to do. Maybe your boss is really mad and you get a bad performance review, or maybe he's really happy and you get a good one, so you're calibrating based on "that was good, that was bad, I don't know." You're going to go read Stack Overflow, something like this. You're going to look at what people said in there. What are the answers that are voted up? That's learning what supposedly you're supposed to do. You go to lectures — this lecture, for example. You're going to listen to someone talk, and maybe they change your mind, or maybe you just accept what they say, maybe you're critical of what they say — I don't know — but you get some input that way, and it affects what's going on in here.

And again, when I look at this, I don't think we're doing a terrible job when it comes to algorithms or stuff like that. If someone goes online and tries to search for how to sort something, I don't necessarily think they're going to find really bad information all the time. I don't think that's going to happen — you're probably going to be able to find the resources you need to learn how that sort of thing works. So what I'm really talking about is that other style of code — the part that's not the algorithm exactly itself. It's everything else. It's all of the infrastructure. It's all that other stuff that isn't really studied in the same kind of way. We don't have order notation for it, or anything like that.

---

And pervasively, all throughout everywhere in the industry, what you will see is things that are vague statements about the quality of that code, like, "it's clean." "We're really washing the code, it's very clean code if you do these things, the code will be clean." This sort of thing. And what we see is, people are taught things that are ostensibly going to make their code clean. But they're never really taught what clean code is, because nobody has a definition for clean code. What they have is a series of things you're supposed to do in order to make the code clean. In other words, we don't have a thing that's like a program you run that says, "yes, clean code; no, not." What we have is "things you're supposed to do, and then the code is clean." That's all we know.

So you see acronyms like SOLID — this is taught a lot. And if you look at the things on there, none of them have any real-world definition. They're not things that happen inside a computer. They're things that happen entirely in your head. They are things that affect what code you think you are allowed to write. That filter is being trained to use these metrics, which are largely fictional. They're imaginary metrics we came up with. They don't correspond to a hard, measurable fact of a CPU. So we made them up. You're being trained not to write code that would violate these, or to write code that would evince these.

Now, lest you think I'm joking when I say that this is something that people are taught to do — because some people are like, "what are you talking about? No one teaches that." Well, literally, when I went to grab the screenshot for Stack Overflow — when I was going to put a slide for that — this was their blog. So literally the day I happened to grab the screenshot, their blog is telling people to do this on Stack Overflow, the place where people go to get programming answers.

So what these things all have in common — because SOLID's not the only one, there's plenty of other things like this where we teach clean code or try to convince people to write clean code — what they all share is one very important, very bad characteristic, and that is: they do not attempt to measure anything. There is no measurement of anything we would actually care about. It's simply implied that things we actually care about would happen if you follow these things. If you take your code and you make sure that it obeys the Liskov substitution principle for all classes that could be substituted — nobody has any argument anywhere that I've ever seen that suggests that that actually improves some real-world metric that we've measured. The assumption is that if you do that, your development process will take less time, or be smoother, or have less bugs, or something. "The code will be cleaner." It's just an abstract statement that "if you do these things, the code will be cleaner, and somehow that will affect something you can actually measure," but we're never going to say what that something actually is, or try to quantify it.

Seriously, look at these things. Is any of those teaching somebody to actually think about a real effect? No. They're teaching people something they're supposed to do, which is taking that filter and modifying it, but it's not actually giving it any actual guidance about a metric or something they're trying to accomplish. It's just rote.

To me, that's just like a ritual. If you're literally just saying, "you do these sets of things and the code is clean," it's very much like, "oh, we're going to bless the food before we eat it." And these might make you feel better, and you may want to do them, but at the end of the day, they are not directly tethered to anything we actually care about. Rituals may have served a purpose once, or they may never have served a purpose, and when we do them today, what we're largely doing is just doing them because someone told us to do them. They claimed that by doing them we would get some outcome, but we're never really told how those rituals were supposed to really accomplish that. We're just supposed to assume that they do.

This is troublesome, because computers are actual things. The model in your mind of what I'm targeting when I'm trying to make my code, and I'm trying to do that filter — that process, the generator/filter process in my brain — if what I'm targeting is SOLID, I'm by definition not targeting the actual computer. The thing I'm supposed to be worrying about — a computer that runs this code — is nowhere to be found in that acronym. It's not there anywhere. Furthermore, I'm not measuring my development time. Nowhere in SOLID does it say, "hey, by the way, these are all just supposed to save development time, so if you end up seeing that you're not saving development time, stop doing it." Nobody says that.

---

So I don't want to give you a new acronym, because I don't think it's very useful, but to underscore the difference between that acronym and what I would have expected to see the trite acronym be, I would expect it to be something like this. I even arranged it in a way you can say "WARMED," just like SOLID. And what this is, is: look, if we're going to teach something that goes up in the filter, what it should be is the actual things that programmers need to care about. And then, if something like SOLID was actually a good idea, you would be able to evaluate that very effectively by caring about things we actually do.

And to me, those things are: Writing the code; Agreeing on code (if we have to have more than one person); Reading code (because not only did we not write all the code usually, but even if we did we might forget what we wrote, so we have to be able to read it); still to Modify the code; the code has to Execute on hardware; and then we have to be able to Debug it. Now, if you look at these things, maybe you would say "Argue" is better, because coders don't agree on stuff, they argue about stuff. But either way, whichever one you want to think of it, it's still the same acronym, so I made sure that would work.

Now, each of these things is a cost. That's what I'm talking about. Each of those things is a cost. Execution is a cost of the actual computation. It's the most important cost, the E. How much does it cost to execute this thing on the end user's computer? They're the people who are ostensibly paying us, and we are wasting their time if that cost is very high because we've shipped them something lousy. The rest of the costs are development time, and those affect the customer, because if we never get the code done, or if it takes us too long to fix problems in the code, or if it takes us too long to add features, that affects the customer too. So all of those things are costs that we ostensibly care about, and while I would say maybe execution should be prioritized, they're all important. You can't just focus on one to the exclusion of the others. So what you're trying to do is figure out a way to minimize all those costs, and you want to minimize as many of them as you can with maybe different weights on them depending on what you care about most. But that's what you're doing.

So, again, pretty simple. I've never seen anything like this. You don't go to conferences and have people say, "look, this is what we should be caring about, let's try to evaluate things on these." People maybe throw up their hands and say, "well, you can't possibly measure these things." Yes you can. It's very easy to measure how many GitHub back-and-forths people have before they actually fix an issue. It's easy to measure how many meetings you're having. It's easy to measure how long it took you to write this piece of code. We are an industry that does an infinite amount of A/B testing on our users, and yet somehow we don't seem to think it's very important to actually do A/B testing with any kind of metrics on any of the stuff we claim we're supposed to be doing.

---

So let's try to bring it back to bad code. Where does it come from? I tried to give you the analogy: programmers are explorers. They're starting from somewhere, and they have a vague destination in mind that they've been told to get to, or that they picked, and they have to get there, but they don't have any real knowledge of where it is. In this analogy, what we've done with all the stuff I just said is, effectively, instead of giving this something like a compass, we just give them tools that don't make any sense. We give them a hammer and a tape measure or something like that. And we're like, "here you go, set off on this journey, here's a hammer."

The worst part about it is, it's not even as bad as giving someone a hammer, because the real-world person would know that the hammer was useless — throw it away. We've told them that this hammer is critical for navigation. So they're trying to hold it up to the sun or something and figure out which direction they're going. They have no idea that we've given them tools that are not even relevant to the problem they're solving. They're not actually tools that measure anything. They're just arbitrary. We just gave them to them and said, "here you go."

Similarly, we spent all our time talking about a map that doesn't exist. We're talking about things like Liskov substitution principle as if that has something to do with programming. It has something to do with certain ideas in certain languages that someone hypothetically thought might be important, but it's entirely fictional. It's like Middle-earth. Your *Lord of the Rings* might be a great story, but if you actually need to get from South America to Africa, it's not going to help you to be thinking about where Mordor is on a map. You have a mental model that's been tuned for things that have nothing to do with the actual stuff you're trying to solve.

So we shouldn't be surprised when new programmers come up and they just do ridiculous stuff, and these things will not control, because they had no metrics, they had nothing to tether them back to what they were actually trying to accomplish. We basically made their entire filter process be about things that are different from the actual things we want to achieve. What else would we expect?

So I think in modern day, when you've gone up through that system and you didn't have the luxury — or the hardship, depending how you want to look at it — of having to do programming in a constrained environment, you end up thinking that things are completely insurmountable. You're like, "I don't know how we would ever do this program any differently than what we're doing. It's got to be a million lines of code, and super slow, and buggy, and, well, this is just how it's done." You can't even envision what the other thing is, because you haven't ever been given the tools to get there.

And furthermore, you're going to have been taught a lot that code reuse is good. Well, the problem is the code that you're going to be reusing. In the narrative, the analogy of navigation, that's base camp. It's starting out at a camp that someone else made. The problem is, they were lost too. They had no idea where they are. So you're typically taking a library made by somebody who didn't really know what they were doing, and that's your new starting point. So people who failed to get to a destination that we wanted to go to are now also the jumping-off point.

And this gets worse than libraries. Whole languages, whole platform ecosystems are this way. So we're literally starting our navigators off already lost in the wilderness with no chance of ever getting to the actual place, making it way harder than it would have been if we just started back in port originally. But they don't know that, because we've never been measuring any of this.

---

So can this be fixed? Sure. I think it could obviously be fixed because we have examples in the past of programmers being trained up not to do these things. And so I think the first thing we need to do is start talking about the real world. Whenever we're talking about something — conferences, programming language constructs, all these things — we should be talking about how it actually affects the results. Construct a real argument for how a number goes down in the cost category. We should be giving people tools, like the one I suggested, that actually measure something we care about, not something we just assume that we care about, because that will lock it in.

All of these things are very much like the navigation base camp analogy. Any time we start someone off from a place that we haven't verified is actually really good, we create a huge problem for all the things they will do in the future. And when I talk about things like that, what I'm saying is: don't just say stuff. Don't just talk about "this is clean code." Actually measure — have something we can measure: "this produced less lines of code for the same equivalent execution." Not "it's less lines of code," because if it's less lines of code but it runs worse, that didn't help anybody. "This is less lines of code, it's easier for people to read" — why? Not because we talked about it and decided it was easier to read, but because we actually checked: when a new person comes to the company, they are now able to read the code faster. It used to take a day for them to read this part and come up to speed on it; now it takes two hours. We can measure this stuff. It's real-world stuff.

And of course, start actually measuring the performance of things. People actually knowing what the performance of something should be — that should have been fundamental the whole time. The acronym SOLID should never be allowed to exist if it doesn't have a P-SOLID, like Performance. There should have been something about: how do any of these things that you're doing affect the actual run time of the program?

So, again, this is just my take on it. A lot of these things are very difficult to prove or disprove because we don't have formalisms for them the way we do for things like algorithms. One of the reasons algorithms are probably better in terms of how far they've developed is because we can test them more concretely. We have a language to talk about them. But I don't fundamentally think these problems of the code that's not the algorithm are as impenetrable as we're making them out to be. We just need to actually focus on something we can point to, something we can measure. Why does TensorFlow take four hours to build, or whatever it takes nowadays? Why? That should not be happening. It does not do anything that complicated. So how did we get there? We can measure that. We know what's going on, and we know the kinds of things — the kinds of filter processes that we've been putting in people's heads — result in code bases like that. We need to start actually nailing those down and saying, "no, don't teach people to do these things anymore. They're producing obviously bad results that we can measure, because it takes four hours to build." We can tell.

So hopefully that gives a little bit of perspective on how I think about where bad code comes from. I wish I had an answer that was more magical, but at the end of the day, I really think that bad code just comes from that one simple failure: we have stopped measuring and talking about what we actually want, and we are almost exclusively talking about, or measuring, things that are largely fictional. They don't directly connect back. And once you make that jump, the next generation never knows about the earlier part. They only see SOLID. They don't know that there's all these other things they should actually have been thinking about, and SOLID was just someone's random idea about maybe some good rules of thumb. But you'd never teach that as your first thing. You'd always teach the evaluation of real metrics first.

---

That was the end of the lecture. I hope you enjoyed it. Like I said, please check out our Kickstarter — links in the description below. We'd love to send you a graphic novel or two if you get a chance. We only have a few days left, because this is the end of our whole promotional thing, and the Kickstarter wraps up in five days, I think, from when this video will be posted. So please check it out if you get a chance.

There will be one more video — it's the Q&A for this. After the lecture I took questions from the actual employees of the company to whom I was presenting. I didn't want to put them into the actual video, so what it will be is: I will summarize the question on a card, and then I'll answer it, so you can see my actual answers but without the actual people who asked the questions. But there were some good questions so I wanted to provide those as well. So I'll be back here for part two tomorrow. Until then, have fun programming, everyone, and I'll see you on the internet.

---

[^1]: Casey says "6802" in the talk; he may have meant the 6502, the famous 8-bit CPU used in the Apple II, Commodore 64, and NES.
